# DSA_601_Project
Final project for machine learning class

#Project Overview
Drug use is pervasive in our society. Nearly half of Americans over the age of 12 have self-reported to being current drinkers of alcohol. Keep in mind that this is not that they *tried* alcohol, but consider themselves someone who drinks it regularly enough to call themselves a user. 1 in 5 of those users are self-reported binge drinkers. 
Approximately 5% of Americans self-reported to be users of illicit drugs. This can range to something seen as relatively innocuous such as popper to drugs such as crack and heroin. Unfortunately, women of childbearing age, especially minorities, are the most likely to self-report as users of illicit drugs once or more a month.
Another unfortunate truth is that mental illness and drug abuse tend to go hand-in-hand. 4 million Americans have self-reported as being diagnosed with a mental illness and a substance abuse disorder. Of those, 50 percent have severe mental disorders in which they could be harmful to themselves or others. When looking at these indicators together, people with mental disorders *and* chronic substance abuse are more prevalent than those with mental illness alone. 

All this information can be found by viewing the driving facts of Emory University's NIA project, which began as a project that investigated drivers for suicide among African American females. The specifc facts can be found at https://psychiatry.emory.edu/niaproject/resources/substance-facts.html.

When it comes to actually administering treatment to individuals with diagnosed or undiagnosed mental illnesses, medical professionals take on the bulk of the responsibility. Physicians, Nurse Practioners, Physician's Assistants, and nurses work tirelessly and largely thanklessly trying to mend a festering wound with a bandage. Understaffing, worker burnout, high turnover rates among lower rungs of the profession (CNAs, junior nurses, etc.), diminishing time with patients, obstructive healthcare administration, and long hours add to the drain of the people tasked with pulling their fellow humans from the abyss of addiction (Everyday Health Group, https://www.healthecareers.com/career-resources/on-the-job/top-10-challenges-facing-healthcare-workers). 
Unfortunately, what this leads to is healthcare professionals having to make decisions to medicate patients with potentially addictive drugs with little or no interatction with them, and no guarantee that they will ever see this patient again. This is compounded by the fact that many patients may jump from provider to provider and give self-reported information that may be inaccurate, or come with records and notes that may be subject to interpretation.
Since the opioid epidemic, the public realization of this has been centered in the public eye, but with no real solutions other than for healthcare workers to swing the pendulum the other way and limit prescriptions of these medications with no real guidance on how and when to do so. While healthcare workers do use experience and the records they have available to inform these decisions, there is room for improvement.

To that end, we have established a model in which the results of several psychological batteries, a comprehensive drug use history, and demographic data can be used to assist in the determination of the chance that the person will abuse prescriptioin medications. This dataset was obtained through the open University of California - Irvine Machine Learning Repository (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Drug+consumption+%28quantified%29). While we don't assume that this model alone can be used by hospital administration of insurance companies to predict the risk of patients in a manner to assist in coverage or treatments, we do hope that we have taken a step towards developing a tool to allow healthcare professionals to move beyond having to read through incomplete charts and qualitative assessments of the patient to assess the risk of abuse of prescription drugs. This way, they have a clear path to explain their decision if they won't prescribe a certain drug, or they can provide a data-driven resource to social worker so that they can increase contact and prepare for an intervention if the patient begins developing abusive habits with the prescribed drug.
